VERSION CONTROL SYSTEM:-

A Version Control System (VCS) is a tool that helps track and 
manage changes to a project's files over time.It allows multiple people
 to work on the same project without overwriting each other's work and makes 
it easy to track and revert changes.

Key features of VCS:

History tracking: Keeps a record of changes, allowing you to see who changed what and when.

Collaboration: Multiple users can work on the same project simultaneously without conflict.

Backup: You can recover previous versions of files or undo changes if needed.

In essence, VCS helps ensure that software development or any collaborative work 
stays organized and manageable. Examples include Git, Subversion (SVN), and Mercurial.

TYPES OF VERSION CONTROL SYSTEMS:-

Centralized Version Control System (CVCS):

There is a central server where all project files and version history are stored.
Users check out files from the central repository, make changes, and commit them back to the server.
Example: Subversion (SVN).

Distributed Version Control System (DVCS):

Each user has their own complete copy of the repository, including all versions and history.
Users can work offline and later sync with others when connected.
Example: Git.

Centralized Version Control System (CVCS):

There is a central server where all project files and version history are stored.
Users check out files from the central repository, make changes, and commit them back to the server.
Example: Subversion (SVN).

Distributed Version Control System (DVCS):

Each user has their own complete copy of the repository, including all versions and history.
Users can work offline and later sync with others when connected.
Example: Git.

						GIT
GIT:- global information tracker.

Git is a distributed version control system (DVCS) used to track changes in source code 
during software development. It allows multiple developers to collaborate on a project,
 manage different versions of the code, and maintain a history of changes. 
Git is widely used in software development due to its efficiency, flexibility,
 and support for non-linear workflows.

Key Features of Git:

Distributed System: Every developer has a full copy of the repository, 
including its history, on their local machine.

Branching and Merging: Git makes it easy to create branches for new features 
or bug fixes and merge them back into the main codebase.

History Tracking: Git keeps a complete history of changes, allowing you to revert
 to previous versions if needed.

Collaboration: Git enables multiple developers to work on the same project simultaneously without conflicts.

Open Source: Git is free and open-source, maintained by the community.


1. Git
What it is: Git is a distributed version control system (DVCS).

Purpose: Tracks changes in source code and enables collaboration among developers.

Key Features:

Tracks file changes and history.

Supports branching and merging.

Allows offline work (since it's distributed).

Manages code repositories locally.

Usage: Git is a command-line tool, but it also has graphical user interfaces (GUIs) like GitKraken, Sourcetree, etc.

Example Command:

bash
Copy
git commit -m "Added new feature"
2. GitHub
What it is: GitHub is a cloud-based platform built around Git.

Purpose: Hosts Git repositories and provides collaboration tools for developers.

Key Features:

Hosts remote Git repositories.

Provides a web-based interface for managing repositories.

Offers collaboration tools like pull requests, issues, and project boards.

Includes CI/CD (Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment) via GitHub Actions.

Supports community features like forking and starring repositories.

Pricing:

Free for public repositories.

Paid plans for private repositories and advanced features.

Example Use Case:

A team uses GitHub to host their code, review pull requests, and track issues.

3. GitLab
What it is: GitLab is a web-based DevOps platform built around Git.

Purpose: Provides a complete DevOps lifecycle tool, including version control, CI/CD, and collaboration.

Key Features:

Hosts remote Git repositories (like GitHub).

Includes built-in CI/CD pipelines.

Offers project management tools like issue tracking, milestones, and epics.

Provides DevOps features like container registry, monitoring, and security scanning.

Can be self-hosted (unlike GitHub, which is primarily cloud-based).

Pricing:

Free tier available with basic features.

Paid plans for advanced DevOps and enterprise features.

Example Use Case:

A team uses GitLab to manage their code, automate testing and deployment, and track project progress.



When to Use Which?

Git:

Use Git when you need to track changes locally or don’t need remote hosting.

Ideal for individual developers or small teams working offline.

GitHub:

Use GitHub for hosting Git repositories and collaborating on open-source or private projects.

Great for teams that want a user-friendly interface and strong community features.

GitLab:

Use GitLab for a complete DevOps solution, including CI/CD, project management, and self-hosting options.

Ideal for teams that want an all-in-one platform for development and deployment.